JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Army Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl breaks his silence,
telling the public radio podcast "Serial"
how he walked away from his Army post in Afghanistan.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this Thursday: President
Obama signs an overhaul to No Child Left Behind
-- how the landmark moment could change public
schools for the first time in more than a
decade.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And how a Vermont ski resort
cashed in on a little known immigrant visa
program.
PAUL SOLMAN: Before the EB-5-funded renovation
and expansion began in 2008, this was a ski
slope going downhill. It's now a year-round
resort attracting a million customers annually.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Geneva, Switzerland, went on
high alert today over new warnings of possible
terrorist attacks. Officials said a search
was on for two to four suspects with possible
links to the Islamic State group. It was unclear
if the alert was tied to last month's attacks
in Paris.
Police stepped up screenings at border crossings,
and there was heavier security deployed outside
the U.N.'s European headquarters and other
sites.
GWEN IFILL: The U.S. military is attempting
to explore expanding its ability to fight
Islamic State forces beyond Iraq and Syria.
The New York Times reports the Pentagon wants
to build up bases across East Africa, Southwest
Asia and the Middle East for special operations
and intelligence.
At the Pentagon today, Defense Secretary Ash
Carter said, that kind of network would help
cut down the militants' reach.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense Secretary: This
tumor is metastasizing or has metastasized.
That's the reality, the recognition of that,
behind the concept of linking together American
counterterrorism and military nodes in the
region and around the world.
GWEN IFILL: The plan is subject to presidential
approval.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican presidential candidate
Donald Trump has postponed a December visit
to Israel. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
had been singled out by many Israeli politicians
for inviting Trump, after the GOP front-runner
called for banning Muslims from entering the
U.S.
Today, Trump tweeted that he's putting off
the trip because -- quote -- "I didn't want
to put Netanyahu under pressure." He said
he will reschedule after he becomes president.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, leaders of Arab states
in the Persian Gulf region condemned verbal
attacks on Muslims and Syrian refugees. Meeting
in Riyadh, the heads of state warned against
what they called hostile, racist and inhumane
rhetoric. None directly named name Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in Washington, the Senate
has approved a short-term funding bill to
keep the government operating through next
Wednesday. The House is expected to follow
suit tomorrow. Negotiators still have to nail
down agreement on long-term tax and spending
measures totaling more than a trillion dollars.
House Speaker Paul Ryan said this morning
he remains optimistic about getting it done.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker of the House:
I think our members understand the situation
quite well. Look, we're not going to get everything
we want in negotiations. The Democrats aren't
going to get everything they want in negotiations.
Not everybody gets what they want when you
negotiate in divided government. But I think
we will complete this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Congressional leaders aim to
complete the omnibus bills next week and adjourn
for the year.
GWEN IFILL: Commercial truck and bus drivers
are going to have to start recording their
driving hours electronically. A new federal
rule released today aims to keep tired drivers
off the road. It requires devices that automatically
log engine hours and other data. Since 1938,
operators have kept paper logs, but accident
investigators say those are easily doctored.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street recouped some of
its recent losses today. The Dow Jones industrial
average gained 82 points to close near 17575.
The Nasdaq rose 22 points, and the S&P 500
added four.
Still to come on the "NewsHour": a first-hand
account from Bowe Bergdahl; a "Sophie's Choice"
for Yazidi refugees weighing the risk of a
journey to Europe; the end of No Child Left
Behind, and much more.
GWEN IFILL: The controversy over the prisoner
exchange that freed Army Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl
from the Taliban last year reignited today,
as Afghanistan struggles to fight back against
the resurgent militant group.
We start with this report from chief foreign
affairs correspondent Margaret Warner.
BOWE BERGDAHL, U.S. Army Veteran: I had this
fantastic idea that I was going to prove to
the world that, you know, I was the real thing.
MARGARET WARNER: It's the first time Bowe
Bergdahl's version of his experience has been
heard publicly. The Army sergeant tells his
story in a new episode of the wildly popular
podcast "Serial." He says he left his post
in Afghanistan without permission in June
2009, hoping to raise concerns about leadership
his unit.
BOWE BERGDAHL: All I was seeing was basically
leadership failure, to the point that the
lives of the guys standing next to me were
literally, from what I could see, in danger.
MARGARET WARNER: But he was captured by Taliban
fighters and remained a prisoner until his
release last May.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States:
This morning, I called Bob and Jani Bergdahl
and told them that, after nearly five years
in captivity, their son Bowe is coming home.
MARGARET WARNER: In the Rose Garden, President
Obama announced he'd been freed, in exchange
for releasing five Taliban inmates at Guantanamo
Bay, who were sent to Qatar. The swap sparked
criticism by Republican lawmakers, who blasted
its legality, some calling Bergdahl a deserter,
and by some of the soldiers who served with
Bergdahl, who also accused him of deserting.
SPC. CODY FULL (RET.), U.S. Army: Countless
people looked for him when he went missing,
putting their own lives on the lives for his.
Combat is difficult. The only thing you can
count on in combat is the commitment of your
fellow American. Knowing that someone you
needed to trust deserted you in war and did
so on his own free will is the ultimate betrayal.
MARGARET WARNER: The president defended his
decision a few days after Bergdahl's release.
BARACK OBAMA: We do not leave anybody wearing
the American uniform behind. We had a prisoner
of war whose health had deteriorated and we
were deeply concerned about, and we saw an
opportunity, and we seized it. And I make
no apologies for that.
MARGARET WARNER: That wasn't the end of it.
Today, Republicans on the House Armed Services
Committee released a 98-page report, finding
the Taliban swap violated several laws, requiring
30 days' notice to Congress, and that the
committee was misled about the extent and
scope of efforts to arrange the transfer.
Democrats called the report an unbalanced,
partisan, and needless attempt to justify
a predetermined position. Bergdahl was originally
charged with desertion and misbehavior before
the enemy, but the Army's investigating officer
recommended his case be treated as a misdemeanor.
Bergdahl is now awaiting a decision on whether
he will be court-martialed.
As the case plays out, the Taliban are again
on the offensive. An attack on Kandahar Airport
this week killed 50 people. And, in September,
the militants seized the northern city of
Kunduz for three days.
Meanwhile, there's turmoil in Kabul, where
the head of Afghanistan's main intelligence
agency resigned today. He had opposed President
Ashraf Ghani's efforts to renew peace talks
with the Taliban.
GWEN IFILL: Now, for more on the continuing
debate surrounding Bowe Bergdahl, we get two
views from members of the House Armed Services
Committee.
Representative Vicky Hartzler is a Republican
from Missouri. She's also the chairwomen of
the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations,
which co-authored the report we just reported
on. And Representative Loretta Sanchez is
a Democrat from California who also serves
on the Homeland Security Commission -- Committee.
Representative Hartzler, was Bowe Bergdahl
worth rescuing, in your opinion?
REP. VICKY HARTZLER (R), Missouri: Well, that's
not to be determined by our report.
What we were looking at is actually the circumstances
relating to his transfer, and if it endangered
Americans, and if the law was violated. And,
clearly, we determined that this administration
violated the law which says they need to notify
Congress at least 30 days before any transfer
from Guantanamo Bay.
And in addition to that, we found much evidence
how this administration misled Congress at
every step of the way. In fact, the Taliban
five notified they were going to be transferred
two days before Congress was even notified.
And this is very, very concerning.
GWEN IFILL: But it sounds like your conclusion
then is that the Taliban five were not a worthwhile
exchange for this American soldier.
REP. VICKY HARTZLER: Well, what's more important
is whether this administration followed the
law or not.
Certainly, as a representatives of the people,
we should know if the five most dangerous
Taliban leaders that we were holding should
be released and the circumstances of those
released. And we're talking about the deputy
minister of defense, the deputy minister of
intelligence, military commanders, friends
of Osama bin Laden.
These are five of the most dangerous individuals
that we had in Guantanamo Bay, and yet they
were released, going around Congress, without
us even being notified of the nature of their
release, of if it posed a security threat
to our nation, and whether the country who
would be accepting them would be able to detain
them and keep them from reengaging in the
fight.
And that is a clear violation of the law.
And it's very concerning, because we know
through media reports that at least three
of these individuals have tried to reengage
again. And we have soldiers still in Afghanistan,
and we -- we fought hard to capture these
individuals, to take them off the battlefield.
And now, potentially, they were being released
without Congress being involved in that decision.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask the same question then
of Representative Sanchez.
Given what we know the exchange -- nature
to have the exchange was, was Bowe Bergdahl
worth rescuing?
REP. LORETTA SANCHEZ (D), California: Well,
I believe that there is one thing all Americans
can agree on, and that is we never leave a
man or a woman behind that is in uniform for
our armed forces.
And I think we can agree on that. So, the
president, in his role as commander in chief,
did what many have done before, negotiated
to get our POW back. Now, we, as the Congress,
passed a resolution a few months ago that
already said, hey, you didn't give us a 30-day
notice.
So, I do not understand why we had to spend
precious resources that we have on our Armed
Services Committee to basically do what came
out, a political report, a politically-minded
report, something with a predetermined end
to it.
GWEN IFILL: But is it possible there is a
connection to be made between the circumstances
of that exchange and the unsettled state we
now find Afghanistan in?
REP. LORETTA SANCHEZ: Look, these -- actually,
these five that were released were not the
worst of the worst. We -- and we didn't choose
these in.
And in the report, the Republicans indicated
that somehow we had chosen these because we
wanted to get them out of Gitmo. And the reality
is that we were negotiating for the life of
a fellow American. That's what the president
was doing.
Now, could he have talked to Congress in some
way? Well, the administration said, look,
this was so important to keep under wraps,
because his health was deteriorating, and
we were trying to get him out, and we didn't
know whether the deal was going to go, and
we were afraid that it was going to leak.
I believe that there could have been a way
for the president and his administration to
talk to some of the ranking members of the
different committees of jurisdiction, those
that, you know, deal with this, but he chose
not to. And I think we have already passed
a resolution that said that.
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask Representative Hartzler
about the Guantanamo Bay connection that Representative
Sanchez just raised, this idea that there
is a goal behind all of this, to be able to
resettle Guantanamo Bay detainees elsewhere,
close the base down, close the detention facility
down.
Do you see a connection?
REP. VICKY HARTZLER: Well, I'm not sure about
that, but do I know that the president promised
in his campaign that he was going to release
people from Guantanamo Bay, that it was his
goal to close it, and he has continued in
that path.
He -- his goal is to continue to close the
facility. And so here he -- he released five
individuals, and we were not able to determine
if we in the negotiations ever authored one
for one or two for one. All of that information
was hidden from us, and it still is hidden
from us. They refuse to give us that information.
It took over a year-and-a-half to carry out
this investigation, primarily because the
administration continued to stonewall in providing
us with e-mails and documentation. When we
did get the documentations, they were redacted
out.
It was very difficult to determine what we
have determined. But it is clear -- and I
think the American people once they read this
report will be as concerned as I am -- that
the president violated the law. Plus, he misled
Congress over and over again, even to the
extent that Secretary Hagel came over to the
Armed Services Committee and denied that they
were negotiating with the Taliban, when, in
fact, we know that he was.
GWEN IFILL: Let me let Representative Sanchez
respond to that.
What do we know and what don't we at this
stage, in your opinion, about this whole episode?
REP. LORETTA SANCHEZ: Well, what I do know
is that what a shame that we spent a year-and-a-half
of resources and time on a report that was
in essence pre-written, being, yes, the Democrats
on the task force for this did sit in the
interviews, they did sit in the hearings,
but they received the first draft of the report,
and they had no input into it, right before
Thanksgiving.
And then they received it yesterday, the final
draft of the report, with -- yesterday at
11:00 a.m. in the morning, and then it was
released today. So, we have what we call a
minority report, the Democrats' side of what
we think is wrong with the report. And, again,
we believe that it was politically motivated,
that it's a pre-written report, if you will,
that it doesn't talk about the real issues
that we might raise, that it makes a lot of
assumptions that are just not true, and that
it goes after the president unnecessarily.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Representative Sanchez, why we
have you, I want to ask you about one other
report that we see today, reported that you
said on "Larry King" in the context of the
whole conversation that we have been having
this week about Muslims in America and whether
they should be here or not, and what their
role is in terrorism, you're quoted as saying,
"It can be anywhere from 5 and 20 percent,
from the people that I speak to, that Islam
is their religion and also have a desire for
a caliphate, and to institute that in any
way possible."
And you linked that to terrorism. Where do
you get that number, 5 to 20 percent of Muslims
interested in caliphate?
REP. LORETTA SANCHEZ: Well, actually, it's
in a book that I read published by the Harvard
Press.
But think about this. What I'm talking is
about Muslims around the world. And I think
that that is a high number. And if you see
the rest of the interview that I have, I say
that. I think that's a very big number, between
5 and 20 percent of Muslims who have this
idea to build a caliphate.
And, yes, a few Muslims are willing to use
violence. We see it, whether it's in Afghanistan,
whether it's ISIS, whether it's in Iraq, whether
it's in the Philippines, in other areas around
the world, with this whole idea of pushing
forward their idea -- their ideas.
GWEN IFILL: OK. We will...
REP. LORETTA SANCHEZ: So, I think we need
to take that into context and say, you know,
how is this that we will fight these terrorists,
these extremists?
GWEN IFILL: OK.
Representative Loretta Sanchez of California,
Representative Vicky Hartzler of Missouri,
thank you both very much.
REP. LORETTA SANCHEZ: Thank you.
REP. VICKY HARTZLER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The plight of the Yazidi religious
sect in Iraq was a major factor in pushing
the United States to war against the Islamic
State group last year.
Last month, their homeland in and around Sinjar,
Iraq, was liberated, but thousands have no
intention of staying.
Special correspondent Jane Arraf brings us
the story of some trying to leave for Europe.
JANE ARRAF: Amira Khan and her family are
planning to leave any day to be smuggled across
the border to Turkey. Going by boat from Turkey
to Greece is the cheapest way to get to Europe.
She's afraid her two sons, Madares (ph) and
Nunber (ph), could drown, as so many have
trying to reach Europe's shores. Tens of thousands
have risked that dangerous passage this year,
arriving on islands like Lesbos. It's a perilous
journey, made even more so by winter coming.
But many Yazidis are even more afraid of going
to back to Sinjar, where ISIS captured or
killed so many of them when they took over
their villages in the summer of 2014. ISIS
considers Yazidis infidels and vowed to either
convert or kill them all.
Amira says she faints when she even thinks
of ISIS.
AMIRA KHAN, Iraq (through translator): It's
dangerous, but what can I say? I have to take
my family and my kids. That's the way to get
out. We're not going to return to Sinjar.
It's dangerous either to stay or to leave.
We might not survive, but we have to try.
JANE ARRAF: A backlash in Europe against refugees
was already building as their numbers swelled.
Now, after the attacks in Paris, Europe's
open doors are suddenly closing.
Tighter border controls have made it much
more difficult to get to Western Europe. But
thousands are still trying. For just over
$2,000 each, Amira's family will be smuggled
to Europe for what they hope will be a new
start.
Her husband, Muhsin, will be one of his first
five brothers to go, but not the last.
MUHSIN, Iraq (through translator): My brothers
collected all the money they have and gave
it to me, so I can make the journey. All the
brothers have given me their money, and once
I get there, I can help them.
JANE ARRAF: Their village is still under ISIS
control. They say almost everything there
has been destroyed by the fighting. The Yazidis
lived peacefully with their Muslim Arab neighbors
in Iraq for years, but that's all over.
MUHSIN (through translator): A lot of people
have died and people have drowned at sea.
It's still better than going back to living
among the Arabs. It's either leave or face
death here.
JANE ARRAF: Many accuse their Arab neighbors
of joining ISIS and killing their people,
inflaming their women, and stealing their
homes. Some want to stay and avenge what was
done to them.
MAN (through translator): As long as we can
breathe, as long as we have a drop of blood
left in us, no matter how far away they run,
we will chase them. We're not going to abandon
our land or our mountain.
JANE ARRAF: Instead of a temporary refuge
while they wait to return home, for many,
this former construction site has become a
way station on the journey to Europe.
Almost everyone here is from Sinjar. They
have turned this empty field into essentially
a village. But even though U.S. airstrikes
and Kurdish forces have retaken their own
towns and villages on Sinjar Mountain, almost
no one here plans to go home again.
A lot of the younger people are trying to
raise enough money to leave. They say, if
they had the money, almost everyone would
be gone by now. Hassan, as he wants us to
call him, is one of the smugglers getting
people to Europe.
Over the past two years, he says he's delivered
more than 1,000 Yazidis and Kurds to Turkey,
where his connections get them to Greece or
Eastern Europe. There is no lack of business,
but it's gotten a little bit harder for smugglers.
HASSAN, Smuggler (through translator): The
prices right now in the last four or five
months are the cheapest than any other time.
Previously, the price was $12,500 per person
and you had to walk part of the way. But now,
until we hand you over to a (INAUDIBLE) organization,
it's $4,000. Until they seal off the borders
for everyone, people will just go.
JANE ARRAF: He says he never smuggles anyone
he doesn't know, and he doesn't smuggle Arabs.
At one of the biggest bus companies in Dohuk,
two buses a day take passengers straight to
Istanbul. Seventy dollars and a passport will
get you a seat. For many, it's a one-way trip.
Rizgar is 18 and traveling with his brother.
His brother will stay in Turkey and pay the
smugglers the $8,000 they agreed on once Rizgar
arrives in Austria.
Another brother, now an Austrian citizen,
is waiting for him there.
RIZGAR, Iraq (through translator): I want
to build a future for myself. I can see myself
learning their language. It's a very beautiful
thing for people to learn different languages
and to go to school. I want to get an education,
because it wasn't good here. ISIS came, and
we couldn't cope.
JANE ARRAF: The bus pulled up to the start
of their 22-hour trip to Istanbul. Rizgar
has heard of the doors in Europe closing for
refugees, but he says he believes people will
welcome them because they know of the tragedy
of what happened to Yazidis.
Misan (ph) is taking her two children and
four nieces and nephews to Istanbul to be
smuggled to Germany. Her husband and other
relatives are already there.
"Everybody else is going. We're going, too,"
she says.
They don't look back. There are no tearful
goodbyes here from the relatives seeing them
off. Most of them are confident they will
see them again in Europe.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane Arraf in
Dohuk, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After years of criticism and
debate over the federal law known as No Child
Left Behind, the president and Congress have
finally agreed on a new education law, one
that aims to shift some of the federal government's
influence over 100,000 public schools.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the United States:
A Christmas miracle, a bipartisan bill signing
right here.
(LAUGHTER)
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama praised the
new bill called the Every Student Succeeds
Act as he prepared to sign it into law at
the White House.
It still requires annual testing of students
between third and eighth grade, as well as
once during high school. But, unlike the prior
law signed by President George W. Bush in
2002, it doesn't give the federal government
power to impose penalties on underperforming
schools.
President Obama, who had waived those penalties,
but had backed many features of the law for
years, acknowledged the shortcomings of No
Child Left Behind.
BARACK OBAMA: It didn't always consider the
specific needs of each community. It led to
too much testing during classroom time. It
often forced schools and school districts
into cookie-cutter reforms that didn't always
produce the kinds of results that we wanted
to see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The new law passed with unusually
large bipartisan margins in the Senate and
the House, a point made yesterday by one of
its sponsors, Republican Senator Lamar Alexander
of Tennessee.
SEN. LAMAR ALEXANDER (R), Tennessee: Not many
things this important pass the us Senate 85-12.
(LAUGHTER)
SEN. LAMAR ALEXANDER: And we're -- this is
a big Christmas present from the Senate and
the House, and it's going down to the president,
and I hope he wraps a big red ribbon around
it and sends it out to 100 million students
and 3.4 million teachers in 100,000 pubic
schools.
JUDY WOODRUFF: States and school districts
will now have more responsibility for judging
how schools are doing and how to utilize testing.
Teacher evaluations, long a subject of intense
debate, will not necessarily be tied to tests.
But there remain many questions about the
practical impact: Will states take action
when needed? And will some districts return
to a time of ignoring the needs of struggling
and minority students?
So, let's take a closer look at what this
law changes and some of those questions and
criticisms of it.
Alyson Klein is a reporter with Education
Week, an organization we collaborate with
on education stories. She was at the White
House today for the president's signing.
Alyson, thank you for being here.
So, what are the main ways that this new bill
is different from the old one?
ALYSON KLEIN, Education Week: So, as you mentioned
at the top, this new law would really broaden
the authority of states when it comes to turning
around low-performing schools, evaluating
teachers, and deciding what exactly to hold
schools accountable for.
States, as you said, will still have to test
students in grades three through eight and
once in high school, but they will have more
say over how much those tests count in gauging
a school's performance.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is that a significant change
in the testing requirement, the testing that's
going to go on?
ALYSON KLEIN: Yes, the testing will continue,
but schools will also be asked to focus on
other factors, things like school climate,
teacher engagement, student engagement, access
to advance course work. So those things will
be looked at in gauging a school's rating
or performance alongside tests.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about teacher performance?
We mentioned that that will not now be necessarily
tied to how the tests go. But what does this
new law say about teachers?
ALYSON KLEIN: So, this law gives states the
authority to decide exactly how to evaluate
their teachers, and states may decide to kick
that responsibility to school districts.
States certainly could continue to hold teachers
accountable for student growth in test scores,
but it would be up to them and not the federal
government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, is there a sense, Alyson
Klein, that there -- that it will feel different
in terms of a federal mandate for public schools?
ALYSON KLEIN: Well, states will really be
able to take much more ownership, I think
the sponsors would say, of their systems.
So, how much change we will see in schools
will end up being up to the state and district
level. Certainly, teachers unions, governors,
state chiefs are expecting to see a more holistic
approach to education going forward.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, we mentioned this passed
by a very big, unusual bipartisan -- large
bipartisan margin, but we do still hear some
criticism out there.
For example, a number of conservative members
of Congress didn't vote for it. And one of
their main arguments, they say it still has
too much a federal presence, despite the changes.
ALYSON KLEIN: Sure.
Well, obviously, there are some folks running
for president, for instance, Senator Ted Cruz,
who opposed the bill in a statement...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
ALYSON KLEIN: ... who would like to see there
be no Department of Education.
So, obviously, even though this would constrain
the Department of Education, some say it would
put a straitjacket around the secretary, it
doesn't get rid of the department altogether,
which is what some folks would like to see.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, there is still is -- there
clearly are still some federal mandates in
here that are connected to the money.
ALYSON KLEIN: Yes. Yes, absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The other criticism you hear,
that you see today, is that -- I guess you
could say it's from the left, but it's those
who are saying that there is not enough in
here that requires schools to do something
for those students who are academically struggling,
those students who are in underperforming
schools.
How do the proponents defend it from that
criticism?
ALYSON KLEIN: So, Senator Patty Murray, who
is a lead sponsor of this bill, and Representative
Bobby Scott -- both of them are Democrats
-- have noted that there are guardrails, is
the term they use, in this bill that would
call for states to look at their very lowest-performing
schools, schools where less than a third of
kids graduate, and schools where certain groups
of students, like English-language learners,
students in special education, racial minorities,
are just not performing as well as their peers.
So, they say that those guardrails are in
place and we're not going to see any sort
of a slide back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But there still is more leeway
for states on what to do about these lowest-performing
schools?
ALYSON KLEIN: Yes, absolutely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly, final last
question, Alyson Klein. Common Core, does
this affect that?
ALYSON KLEIN: So, this would turn control
over standards completely over to states.
The Obama administration, through its No Child
Left Behind waiver program, has required states
to either adopt Common Core or a set of standards
that their institutions of higher education
sign off on. It's kind of technical. But this
law essentially says, you know, you need to
have challenging academic standards that will
get students ready for higher education.
But it takes the federal government out of
the picture. That means states could continue
to do Common Core if they want to, but there
is nothing saying that they have to.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alyson Klein with Education
Week, thank you.
ALYSON KLEIN: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Earlier this week, we looked at
how a little known immigration program originally
intended to benefit poor and rural communities
is being used, and some say abused, by wealthy
urban developers. Congress must decide whether
to renew the 25-year-old program next week.
Tonight, economics correspondent Paul Solman
has a report about how the program is helping
a poor rural area, but still stirring up controversy.
It's part of our series Making Sense, which
airs every Thursday on the "NewsHour."
Just four miles from the Canadian border,
surf's up, however improbably, at the Jay
Peak Resort, part of the half-billion-dollar
development project to transform the economically
depressed Northeast Kingdom, as this corner
of Vermont is called, with foreign investment.
The developer is Bill Stenger.
BILL STENGER, CEO, Jay Peak Resort: In the
last seven years, we have constructed three
different hotels, a beautiful indoor water
park, ice arena, conference center, wedding
facility. And we have had a tremendous impact
on our local economy regionally as well.
PAUL SOLMAN: A local economy that, for most
of Vermont's history, has been at the very
bottom, but now leads the state in job creation.
So, the Northeast Kingdom wins, tourists win,
and so do the foreign investors, not only
with a promised return on their investment,
but -- and here's the novel incentive of the
so-called EB-5 program -- with green cards,
permanent resident visas for them and their
families, in exchange for forking over $500,000
to private companies to create at least 10
jobs in areas of deep unemployment.
BILL STENGER: Well, you don't have to live
in Vermont. There are a number of people from
around the world who love Florida, Arizona,
California, warmer weather.
PAUL SOLMAN: But besides the lure of sunny
climes, says Stenger:
BILL STENGER: Parents oftentimes will gift
their son or daughter an investment. They
can complete their studies here. And if they
can find a job in the United States, the green
card will allow them to accept the job, and
within five years they will be able to apply
for citizenship, and it will be granted.
PAUL SOLMAN: Of course, some might have a
problem with this citizenship for a cool half-million
in cash deal, even if it is creating a winter
wonderland in the jobs-starved Northwoods.
Do you think it is fair that rich people get
to come to the United States, when there are
so many truly desperate emigres from a place
like Syria, say, out there on the water as
we speak?
BILL STENGER: I'm seeking capital from a legal
source that's been in existence since 1990
that is promoted by our government, helps
us. And, yes, those people are successful
and they're contributing to our economy.
PAUL SOLMAN: Well, they certainly seem to
be improving life in and around Jay Peak.
Before the EB-5-funded renovation and expansion
began in 2008, this was a ski slope going
downhill. It's now a year-round resort attracting
a million customers annually to its rides,
rinks, restaurants. Dining revenues alone
now top $10 million, double what the entire
resort took in pre-EB-5.
MAN: To do something like this for this area
is immense. It's priceless.
PAUL SOLMAN: For chef Mike Eldred (ph) and
his assistant, Bob McCrary (ph), economic
growth has meant career growth as well.
MAN: Somebody like myself who could be maybe
just cooking steaks, but because of this growth,
it gives me an opportunity where I can become
a supervisor. I can keep moving up.
PAUL SOLMAN: Growth that has even benefited
the local quilting bee.
WOMAN: We started this about six years ago
with 33 people at our group when we were still
in the old hotel.
PAUL SOLMAN: Kay Corsen (ph) was the event's
organizer.
WOMAN: By Jay Peak opening this wonderful
conference center, we're able to expand what
we do. We have 115 people here this year.
PAUL SOLMAN: Including Helen Short (ph), a
nurse from nearby Enosburg Falls.
WOMAN: I voluntarily went up and spoke to
Bill Stenger because I wanted to thank him.
A lot of the farms were going out of business.
There wasn't much opportunity for the youth
in this area. And now you have come here,
and it's like this big enterprise and there
is building and construction going on, and
students are employed in high school
PAUL SOLMAN: As lifeguards, ski patrols, desk
clerks. No wonder that in neighboring Newport,
Bill Stenger is treated like man of the year,
if not of the millennium.
Newport is where Stenger and his partner,
Ariel Quiros, have half-a-dozen new EB-5 projects
pending, most ambitiously a stem cell manufacturing
facility affiliated with a South Korean biotech
firm.
ARIEL QUIROS, Chairman: We also will co-develop
and manufacture various kinds of artificial
organs, such as artificial kidney, heart and
liver.
PAUL SOLMAN: I understand why you would build
up a resort, but a biotech center in the Northeast
Kingdom?
BILL STENGER: It's a great idea. We are at
the right place at the right time with capital,
patient capital, and a great business plan.
There is going to be enormous opportunity
in the construction trades.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, remember, Stenger is a promoter.
And if all this sounds too good to be true,
well, some say it is, most notably some of
the investors.
Tony Sutton was among Jay Peak's first EB-5
investors in early 2008, but is now back home
in England running a large car dealership.
TONY SUTTON, Investor: The problems started
back in 2014, when we received the exit strategy
letter from Jay Peak, which was completely
the opposite to what they had promised would
happen.
PAUL SOLMAN: Sutton was one of a group of
35 who put up half-a-million dollars each
to build the Tram Haus Lodge at Jay Peak.
Twenty of the investors have now complained
to the state, which oversees EB-5 in Vermont,
that Stenger and Quiros had promised their
money back in five years.
But they didn't do that?
TONY SUTTON: No, they gave us all IOUs. And
if you look at the company that the IOUs are
drawn against, our research suggests that
that company, Jay Peak Management, Inc., has
no assets, no income and no way of servicing
the IOUs for any of the investors.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, you don't think you will
ever get your capital back?
TONY SUTTON: No, not from Jay Peak.
BILL STENGER: There is no obligation to pay
the investment back.
PAUL SOLMAN: But Stenger maintains the loan
is guaranteed by the entire resort, and besides:
BILL STENGER: We want to pay them back. We
want to exit them.
But what -- this gentleman would have liked
us to have given him a $500,000 check on year
five in one day. Well, the markets did -- the
markets crashed. We needed a little more time.
PAUL SOLMAN: It sounded like a reasonable
defense.
And besides, I said to investor Sutton:
You got four green cards for yourself and
your family. So why should anybody sympathize
with the fact that you didn't get your money
on time or might not ever even get it?
TONY SUTTON: It's not about sympathy and it's
not about the return on the investment. It's
about the program that we bought into and
the way the program was sold to the EB-5 investors.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that's a real concern, says
journalist Anne Galloway.
ANNE GALLOWAY, Vermont Journalism Trust: If
people in other countries are investing in
something that they have put faith in, and
that faith is lost, that has a ripple effect
across all EB-5 projects. And I know that
our stories have had kind of a chilling effect.
PAUL SOLMAN: Galloway founded the investigative
reporting Web site VermontDigger.org. And
dig, she has for the last two years on Bill
Stenger's various projects, among the largest
in the country funded by EB-5.
ANNE GALLOWAY: I know from the documents that
I have collected, hundreds of pages of e-mails
and contracts and agreements and so on, that
there are very big questions about how the
money has been handled.
PAUL SOLMAN: There is the concern out there
that investor money is being siphoned off
by individuals.
ANNE GALLOWAY: That is a question that's come
up, in particular around the AnC Bio project.
And the state wanted to know more about what
about $60 million went to.
PAUL SOLMAN: For his part, developer Stenger
investor says he's stung by any suspicions
and is obviously committed to the community
in which he lives and works.
BILL STENGER: Hundreds of families are relying
on me and my team to implement what we do,
and do it right.
PAUL SOLMAN: Look, we're in no position to
tell whether or not financial ledger domain
has been going on. We leave that to the state
and federal agencies now reviewing the matter.
But reporter Galloway's concern is broader.
ANNE GALLOWAY: I think, if the United States
is going to promote a program that attracts
people from overseas, it ought to be well-regulated.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, in the end, that's why investors
like Tony Sutton are raising a ruckus.
We had one last question for him about Bill
Stenger and his partners.
One interpretation here is, they're trying
to do something good for a depressed part
of Vermont.
TONY SUTTON: On that basis, Paul, you can
rob a bank and build a hospital, and everything's
fine.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting from Northeast Kingdom,
Vermont, for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: a spectacular new wilderness
park in Chile and the man who helped create
it.
Earlier this week, Douglas Tompkins, the founder
of the outdoor equipment company The North
Face, died in a kayaking accident in Chile,
the country where he spent much of his time.
Tompkins and his wife, Kris, have long been
dedicated to purchasing natural wilderness
areas and then turning them over to the countries
in South America.
The latest, the Patagonia National Park in
Chile, is opening this month.
Special correspondent Mike Cerre has this
report. It features Tompkins' financial broadcast
interview before he died.
MIKE CERRE: Imagine a national park with the
best of Yellowstone, Yosemite and Grand Teton
national parks, without the traffic or wait
lists for campsites.
Chile's new Patagonia National Park will be
the size of Rhode Island when it's combined
with two adjacent national reserves, complete
with snowcapped mountains, wild rivers and
sweeping grasslands, as these ultra-marathon
runners discovered on their 100-mile fund-raising
run the length of the park, sponsored by the
Patagonia Company.
MAN: Epic!
KRIS TOMPKINS, CEO, of Patagonia, Inc.: Since
we have moved to Chile, we have been really
fortunate enough to have acquired just about
2.4 million acres between Chile and Argentina,
all of which we hope will become part of a
national park system in either country.
There's a reason that people come from all
over the world here, and they stay, because
there is something alluring about it. After
24 years of working on the company Patagonia,
I thought there must be something to this.
I'm going to go see it for myself. And I fell
in love.
MIKE CERRE: Kris Tompkins, the Patagonia outdoor
clothing company's first CEO, also fell in
love with Doug Tompkins, the founder of North
Face and Esprit companies, who moved to Patagonia
after exiting the business world in the mid-'90s.
DOUGLAS TOMPKINS, Conservationist: Boy, they're
a lot more satisfying than selling a lot of
clothes that nobody needs, and being part
of the problem, rather than an attempt at
a solution to the immense eco-social crisis
that we're all immersed in.
MIKE CERRE: Doug Tompkins and Yvon Chouinard,
the founder of the Patagonia clothing company,
first discovered the Patagonia region while
making a movie of their infamous 1968 road
trip to the tip of South America in a van,
surfing and climbing mountains the length
of Chile.
DOUGLAS TOMPKINS: I'm sort of half-Chilean
at this point anyway, half-Argentine. This
is where I have been living and working for
a long time now.
MIKE CERRE: The road less traveled to Patagonia
and their new park and home away from home
is still unpaved. It took us eight hours to
get there from where Doug picked me up at
the closest commercial airport in the Aysen
region on the Chilean side of Patagonia, nearly
1,000 miles south of Santiago, and nearly
as many miles north of Tierra del Fuego at
the tip.
Valle Chacabuco, the original land for the
park, was one of South America's largest sheep
ranches until it went into serious decline
due to severe overgrazing.
KRIS TOMPKINS: It was really a diminished
landscape. In some places, the land had been
eaten down so consistently and for so many
decades that there wasn't really an opportunity
for it to come back.
MIKE CERRE: The Tompkins, along with the help
of other conservationists, bought the nearly
200,000-acre ranch in 2004 for $10 million.
Over the past 20 years, they have invested
another $55 million of their and other conservation
foundations' money to restore the grasslands
and local fauna, including the nearly extinct
huemul deer and pumas, which had become quite
scarce.
With the help of local and foreign student
volunteers, they have removed over 500 miles
of fences and created hundreds of miles of
trails. They designed and built the park's
infrastructure to make it more accessible
and accommodating to visitors from Chile and
around the globe.
KRIS TOMPKINS: Before too long, we step out.
We are donating this park, these lands, the
infrastructure, the whole story, to the Chilean
people, and through that, the Chileans will
develop their sense of ownership.
DOUGLAS TOMPKINS: We choose the national park
idea because it's really the highest form
of protection for landscapes that exists under
current law, especially in Chile and Argentina.
MIKE CERRE: The idea of privately funding
parks and then turning them over to the government
for national parks might be new to Chile,
but not in the United States. Some of our
more famous parks began with private donations
and citizen stewards, from Teddy Roosevelt
protecting a redwood forest in Muir Woods,
California, donated by a local couple, to
John D. Rockefeller Jr.'s donation of private
lands which became the Acadia National Park
in Maine and part of an American park system
which some believe to be one of our greatest
ideas.
KRIS TOMPKINS: The national parks system is
a great combination of public and private
effort, and certainly it's the case in everything
that we're working on.
You can't separate out the necessity, the
urgency of the private sector, individuals.
And I don't care if they have a lot of money,
they have a little money. That is not the
point.
MIKE CERRE: Like the conservation vs. development
battles in the U.S. and elsewhere, not all
Chileans have shared the Tompkins' conservation
vision.
Over the years, they have been buffeted by
shifting political winds, many of them generated
by opposition rumors that they were trying
to divide the country in half, and the ones
about creating a doomsday refuge and an American
nuclear waste site.
It was a pro-development plan to dam the local
rivers and run hydroelectric power lines through
their parks and the length of the country
that finally turned Chilean public opinion
in the Tompkins' favor in order to protect
the future of Patagonia.
The controversy turned Doug Tompkins, the
mysterious American conservationist, into
a local and national hero.
DOUGLAS TOMPKINS: The byproduct of the main
thrust to protect the biodiversity of a given
place is that you get especially young people
out to the parks, because it will be future
generations that will have to value these
landscapes and these ecosystems and make sure
that nobody is changing the law.
CAROLINA PAVON, Chile: This park is going
to be a good thing for Chile. I think that
the peoples that work here transmit all the
knowledge about this park about the nature
to other people. And this site it's going
to be Like a huge economic resource for the
country.
MIKE CERRE: If they build it, will the people
come? And will eco-tourism help the local
economy as much or more than other types of
development? It's about to become much clearer
this summer season in Chile starting December,
when most of the park will finally be open
to the public.
KRIS TOMPKINS: You are seeing what you might
have seen 150 years ago in here in the United
States. People are starting to go and really
learn about the country they were born into
and enjoy it.
MIKE CERRE: For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Mike Cerre reporting from Patagonia, Chile.
GWEN IFILL: Now we return to Brief But Spectacular,
our occasional series where we ask interesting
people to discuss their passions.
Among this year's Kennedy Center Honors awardees
is an actress and singer who made her debut
on Broadway at age 13, and is perhaps best
known for playing Anita in the film adaptation
of "West Side Story."
Rita Moreno originally struggled with being
typecast, but fought industry pressure, and
went on to become the first Latino to win
an Oscar, a Tony, an Emmy and a Grammy.
This fall, she released her first all Spanish
album titled "Una Vez Mas."
RITA MORENO, Actress: Being the house ethnic
was destroying my life and my sense of myself,
because I had been consigned to play every
dusky maiden you have ever seen in your life
in movies.
So, if I was playing Hawaiian girl, I talked
like this. If I was playing an Arabian, I
still talked like this. I didn't know. But
I was trying. I was really trying to improve
things.
Nobody gave a damn. Moving to Los Angeles,
I was then about, yes, 16, because I remember
that I went there under contract to MGM studios,
the studio of my dreams, because that's where
all the great musicals were made.
"LIFE" magazine decided to do a story about
a young actress in Hollywood in 1954. And
I made the cover. And I remember that the
fellow who was doing the story on me said,
"Listen, kid, I just want you to know, if
Eisenhower gets a cold, you're off the cover."
I auditioned for "West Side Story" just like
everybody else, and I nearly had a heart attack,
because I hadn't danced in about -- oh, I
don't know, about 15 years.
I got a friend of mine who had played Anita
on the road in "West Side Story" to teach
me some steps. But she warned me that they
don't always teach you the same steps. And
to my astonishment, the first part of the
audition, the dance director said, OK, let
me teach you these steps from "America." And
I said, OK. And it was the steps that this
girl taught me.
When I was nominated for the Oscar, I was
absolutely positive that Judy Garland would
win for "Judgment at Nuremberg," and then
they call my name, and I was absolutely paralyzed.
And I remember walking down to the stage and
saying to myself, don't run, it's not dignified.
I got up there and I said the following. Unbelievable.
(APPLAUSE)
RITA MORENO: I can't believe it.
(LAUGHTER)
RITA MORENO: Good lord. I'll leave you with
that.
(LAUGHTER)
RITA MORENO: Oh, my God, the things I could
have said. It just kills me.
There is something about sex that always brings
out the funny in me. I think it's because
we make such fools of ourselves over it. You
know, get laid, oh, my God, people will do
just about anything.
I think people get won over, too, by a woman's
kind of sexuality. And that's what I was trying
to achieve when I sang "Fever" with Animal,
the drummer from the Muppets. Well, I think
it's one of the funniest things I have ever
done. I really had a hard time not laughing.
I have always wanted to sing and dance all
my life, but there is one song that absolutely
captures the essence of who I am.
(singing): As I approach the prime of my life,
I find I have the time of my life, learning
to explore at my leisure every single pleasure.
And so I happily concede this is all I ask.
This is all I need.
I'm Rita Moreno. And this is my Brief But
Spectacular take on me.
GWEN IFILL: I have always wanted to be her
when I grow up.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: She's the whole package.
GWEN IFILL: And she has a birthday, which
makes her...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tomorrow.
GWEN IFILL: Coming up -- which makes her 83
years old.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Happy birthday, Rita.
GWEN IFILL: That's the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Friday, Judy sits down with Britain's defense
minister as they join the fight against ISIS
in Syria.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again here tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS NewsHour," thank
you, and
good night.
END